922 
Original Article 
Biosci. J., Uberlândia, v. 32, n. 4, p. 922-930, July/Aug. 2016 
PRODUCTION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF BAMBOO PELLETS 
 
PRODUÇÃO E CARACTERIZAÇÃO DE PELLETS DE BAMBU 
 
Carlos Roberto SETTE JR1; Paola de Castro e FREITAS2; Vanessa Pereira FREITAS3;  
Fábio Minoru YAMAJI4; Rogério de Araújo ALMEIDA5 
1. Professor Doutor do curso de Engenharia Florestal, Universidade Federal de Goiás – UFG, Goiânia, GO, Brasil. 
crsettejr@hotmail.com; 2. Engenheira Florestal, Mestre em Agronomia, Universidade Federal de Goiás – UFG, Goiânia, GO, Brasil; 3. 
Engenheira Florestal, Universidade Federal de Goiás – UFG, Goiânia, GO, Brasil; 4. Professor Doutor do curso de Engenharia Florestal, 
Universidade Federal de São Carlos – UFSCar, Sorocaba, SP, Brasil; 5. Professor Doutor do curso de Agronomia, Universidade Federal 
de Goiás – UFG, Goiânia, GO, Brasil. 
 
ABSTRACT: Agroforestry biomass is a great energy alternative, with potential to produce pellets and 
briquettes. The objective of this study was to assess the potential of using the biomass of bamboo species to produce 
pellets. Mature culms of the species Bambusa vulgaris var. Vitatta, Dendrocalamus asper and Bambusa tuldoides were 
used, in addition to wood discs of 6 year-old hybrids of E. urophylla x E. grandis for comparative purposes. Biomass was 
characterized by the bulk density, proximate analysis, calorific value and energy density. Pellets were characterized 
(moisture content, length, diameter, durability, bulk, apparent and energy density) after production. All the characteristics 
of bamboo and eucalyptus pellets met the quality specifications required in international product marketing standards, 
except for the ash levels. The species Bambusa vulgaris var. vitatta, Dendrocalamus asper and Bambusa tuldoides had 
energy characteristics that indicate its potential for being used as an energy source in the form of pellets. 
 
KEYWORDS: Bioenergy. Densification of biomass. Energy potential. 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Biomass is one of the renewable energy 
sources with the greatest potential for development 
in the next years, and is considered one of the main 
options to diversify energy sources and reduce 
dependence on fossil fuels (ANEEL, 2013). The 
energy and rational use of biomass tends to promote 
the development of economically disadvantaged 
regions, 
through 
job 
creation 
and 
income 
generation, reducing the problem of rural exodus 
and dependence on foreign energy (LYBEER, 
2006).  Such energy and rational use of biomass is 
of great environmental importance for reducing the 
use of fossil fuels and the emission of Greenhouse 
Effect Gases, consequently, mitigating global 
warming.  
Wood and agricultural crops (e.g., sugar 
cane) are the main energy biomass sources currently 
used in Brazil (GARCIA, et al., 2013). However, 
alternative biomass sources with the potential for 
power 
generation, 
such 
as 
agricultural/forest 
residues and grasses, have been used and are the 
focus of studies on the substitution of fossil fuels 
and natural gas. Bamboo species are among the 
alternative fuels studied, and have a high growth 
rate and accelerated biomass production that places 
them in a prominent position for energy use 
(SCURLOCK et al., 2000).  
The estimated area planted with bamboo 
species in the world is 40 million hectares 
(LOBOVIKOV et al., 2007). In Brazil, the large 
forest stands with bamboo are located in the states 
of Maranhão, Piauí, Pernambuco, Paraíba and 
Bahia, and are intended primarily to provide 
biomass and cellulose (SANTI, 2015). The species 
Dendrocalamus asper (Schult. & Schult.) Backer 
ex. K. Heynek (MOGNON et al., 2015), Bambusa 
vulgaris Schard. ex J.C. Wendl and Bambusa 
tuldoides Munro (SANTANA, 2014) are highlighted 
as the most common and widespread exotic tropical 
species of bamboo in the country, and have a great 
potential due to its rapid growth and significant 
biomass. However, the limited scientific knowledge 
on bamboo species, especially regarding the 
possibility of its use as an energy source, has 
restricted the full development of the culture.  
The pellets are among the possible biomass 
energy sources most widely used in the world  
(TOSCANO et al., 2013; ARRANZ et al., 2015). 
Pellets have characteristics superior to other 
biomass products, such as woodchips and briquettes, 
especially in regards to mass and energy densities 
(ARRANZ et al., 2015). Such higher density results 
in lower transportation costs and greater efficiency 
in regards to energy conversion (CARONE et al., 
2011), having suitable properties for use in 
residential and industrial scale. 
World pellet production had an accelerated 
growth in recent years, of 7 to 19 million tons from  
2006 to 2012 (FAO, 2012), mainly due to the 
increased demand generated by environmental 
Received: 21/01/16 
Accepted: 02/15/16 

923 
Production and characterization… 
 
SETTE JR. C. R. et al. 
Biosci. J., Uberlândia, v. 32, n. 4, p. 922-930, July/Aug. 2016 
policies and bioenergy use goals in Europe (DUCA 
et al., 2014). Pellet production in Brazil is evolving 
slowly, largely because of the little information on 
the product and the industry, with a small-scale 
production in 14 factories of 60,000 ton/year 
(ABIPELL, 2013) intended mainly to the thermal 
market (ESCOBAR, et al., 2014).  
The biomass of pellets has been widely 
studied worldwide (LIU et al., 2014). However, 
scientific studies that evaluated the production of 
pellets from the biomass of bamboo species and 
their characteristics (LIU et al., 2012, 2013, 2014) 
are rare. The development of new research projects 
given the increasing demand for renewable energy 
from biomass is essential. The objective of this 
study was to evaluate the potential of using bamboo 
species biomass to produce pellets.  
 
MATERIAL AND METHODS  
 
Selection, collection and preparation of samples 
Mature culms of the species Bambusa 
vulgaris var. vulgaris, Dendrocalamus asper and 
Bambusa tuldoides, in an area of 5-year old 
experimental, were selected and collected in clumps 
in the central state of Goiás. The altitude in the 
region is 730m, and the climate is type Aw (hot and 
semi-humid) according to the Köppen classification, 
with a well-defined dry season from May to 
September, average annual precipitation of 1.400 
mm and soil characterized as dark Oxisol. The 
criteria defined by Hidalgo-Lopez (2003) were 
considered to select mature culms: placed in the 
center of the thicket, with high hardness and dark 
color. A total of five culms were randomly chosen 
for each species, and 30 cm samples near the DBH 
(1.3 meters high) and between the nodes were made 
through cutting.  
A total of five trees of 6-year-old  
Eucalyptus grandis x Eucalyptus urophylla hybrids 
(popularly known as eucalyptus urograndis) were 
selected from a forest plantation located in the same 
area used to sample bamboo culms, for comparison. 
These five trees were cut and pruned, and short logs 
of 30 cm in length were cut in the trunk near the 
DBH (1.3 meters high).  
Bamboo and eucalyptus samples were used 
to characterize biomass and production of pellets, 
which were transformed into sawdust using a 
crusher and a Wiley knife mil, and mechanically 
separated in the orbital shaker of sieves with 
intermittent beats, to select the faction removed in 
the sieve (number 24 international, with mesh 
opening of 60). 
 
Evaluation of biomass characteristics  
The procedures carried out to evaluate 
biomass characteristics were performed in triplicate 
to obtain the arithmetic mean (ARRANZ et al., 
2015). The proximate analysis is based on the 
ABNT NBR 8112 (BRAZILIAN ASSOCIATION 
OF TECHNICAL STANDARDS; ASSOCIAÇÃO 
BRASILEIRA DE NORMAS TÉCNICAS - ABNT, 
1983), where ash content, volatiles, fixed carbon 
were determined.  
The bulk density of the biomass was 
obtained according to the methods established in 
ABNT NBR 6922 (BRAZILIAN ASSOCIATION 
OF TECHNICAL STANDARDS; ASSOCIAÇÃO 
BRASILEIRA DE NORMAS TÉCNICAS - ABNT, 
1981). The relationship between the mass of the 
biomass and the known volume of a container was 
used.  
The highest calorific value was determined 
using a calorimeter bomb (IKA WORKS, model C-
200), as established by ABNT NBR 8633 
(BRAZILIAN ASSOCIATION OF TECHNICAL 
STANDARDS; ASSOCIAÇÃO BRASILEIRA DE 
NORMAS TÉCNICAS - ABNT, 1984), and the 
energy density was calculated multiplying the gross 
calorific value by the bulk density of biomass. 
 
Pellets production and evaluation 
The bamboo and eucalyptus pellets were 
produced using a laboratory pelletizer, consisting of 
a lower part with a circular matrix with 6 mm holes 
and an upper part with two rolls with rotational 
movements (around its axis and around the matrix). 
The bottom of the matrix also has a blade which 
cuts the pellets into a standard size of 30 mm. The 
moisture content of two kilograms of biomass of 
each species was adjusted to 20% for the pellet 
production process, as recommended by the 
manufacturer of the equipment. 
First, with the objective to determinate 
average dimensions, moisture content and density 
apparently individual, thirty pellets of each species 
were randomly selected. The length (L in mm) and 
diameter (d in mm) were measured using a digital 
caliper and the initial mass was determined, right 
after production (Mi in g) and final mass (Mf in g), 
after drying in an oven at 103°C and stabilizing. 
The moisture content of each pellet (U%) 
was obtained using equation 1, and following 
ABNT NBR 14929 (BRAZILIAN ASSOCIATION 
OF TECHNICAL STANDARDS; ASSOCIAÇÃO 
BRASILEIRA DE NORMAS TÉCNICAS - ABNT, 
2003).  
 
 
 
(1) 

924 
Production and characterization… 
 
SETTE JR. C. R. et al. 
Biosci. J., Uberlândia, v. 32, n. 4, p. 922-930, July/Aug. 2016 
The apparent density of each pellet (dap in 
g.cm-3) was obtained using equation 3, whereas the 
individual volume (V in cm³) was determined by 
equation 2. 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
The bulk density (dbulk in g.cm-3) of the 
pellets was calculated as the  ratio of the pellet mass 
(mp in g) and the volume of a container (Vc in cm³), 
using equation 4. The pellets were placed in a 
container, and then were weighed using a digital 
precision scale. The volume of the container was 
determined using its length and diameter. 
 
 
 
 
(4) 
 
The durability of the pellets (Pd in %) was 
determined as the loss of mass of the samples (see 
Toscano et al. 2013 and Liu et al. 2014) and using 
equation 5. A total of twenty pellets of each species 
were weighed to obtain the initial mass (mid in g) 
and moved to a vibrating sieve for 10 minutes, at 80 
rotations per minute. After this procedure, the 
pellets were weighed once again, when the final 
mass was obtained (mfd in g).  
 
 
(5) 
The 
energy 
density 
was 
calculated 
multiplying the highest calorific value of the 
biomass by the apparent density of the pellets. 
 
Statistical data analysis  
A completely randomized design with four 
treatments (species) was used in the statistical 
analysis of the results obtained. Analyses were 
carried out in the software JMP (SAS INSTITUTE, 
1997), and the outliers and heterogeneity of variance 
were assessed. An Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) 
was used to verify the effect of the species, and the 
Tukey test was used (at a 95% probability). 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Biomass characterization 
The results of the proximate analysis of the 
biomass are shown in Table 1.  
 
Table 1. Proximate analysis analysis of the biomass of Bamboo and Eucalyptus. 
Species 
Carbon 
  Fixed 
Volatile content
Ash content 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
B. tuldoides 
21.8  a  (0.6) 
75.2 a  (0.7) 
3.0 a  (0.1) 
B. vulgaris 
22.8  ab  (0.3) 
74.7 a  (0.3) 
2.5 ab  (0.2) 
D. asper 
23.0  b  (0.4) 
75.0 a  (0.2) 
2.1 b  (0.3) 
E. urograndis  
17.5  c  (0.2) 
82.2 b  (0.5) 
0.3 c  (0.1) 
Means followed by the standard deviation. Means followed by the same letter in the column do not differ by the Tukey test at 5% 
significance. 
 
The average levels of carbon of the bamboo 
species ranged from 21.8 to 23.0% and were 
statistically higher than that observed for the 
Eucalyptus wood (17.5%). This result shows an 
advantage of using bamboo species rather than 
eucalyptus, once fuels with high fixed carbon 
content have slower burning, providing longer 
residence time in burning devices when compared to 
material with lower fixed carbon contents (Oliveira 
et al. 2010). Fixed carbon contents support the 
findings of Brito and Barrichello (1982), who 
showed bamboo biomass values ranging from 14% 
to 25%. 
The average levels of volatile material were 
75.2% for B. tuldoides, 74.7% for B. vulgaris var. 
vittata, 75.0% for D. asper (without statistical 
difference) and 82.2% for E. urograndis. The 
contents of volatile material of E. urograndis was 
statistically higher than the contents recorded for the 
bamboo species. The quantity of volatile material in 
the wood biomass is usually high, ranging from 65 
to 85% (ARANTES et al., 2013), and is related to 
burning in the carbonization process, which is faster 
the higher the content of volatiles. This is one of 
advantages of biomass relative to mineral coal, 
which, however, makes the systems designed for the 
coal combustion not entirely applicable to the 
combustion of biomass (WERTHER et al., 2000).  
The amount of volatile materials strongly influences 
combustion and the thermal decomposition behavior 
of solid fuels (OBERNBERGER; THEK 2004).  
The ash content, representing the material 
that was not burned, was statistically higher for the 
biomass of bamboo species (2.1 to 3.0%) compared 
to the biomass of E. urograndis (0.3%). These 
results support the findings of Liu et al. (2014). The 
high ash contents of the bamboo species are related 
to the high silica contents present in the chemical 

925 
Production and characterization… 
 
SETTE JR. C. R. et al. 
Biosci. J., Uberlândia, v. 32, n. 4, p. 922-930, July/Aug. 2016 
composition of the culms (TAMOLANG et. al., 
1980; COSTA, 2004) and represent disadvantages 
for this biomass compared to Eucalyptus, once the 
ash can cause damage to the structure of burners. 
The application in agricultural and forest soils are 
alternatives for the residue produced in large 
quantities by the species of bamboo in the form of 
ashes, during the burning process. Several studies 
have shown the importance of ashes in increasing 
soil 
fertility, 
mineral 
nutrition 
and 
forest 
productivity (ZHANG et al., 2002; MAEDA et al., 
2008), or as a mineral additive partially replacing 
Portland cement in concrete due to the high silica 
content of the material. Such use in cement provides 
high reactivity and improvements in physical and 
mechanical 
properties 
of 
the 
concrete 
(RODRIGUES et al., 2013). 
There is no standardization of solid fuels, 
such as pellets, in Brazil (CARASCH et al., 2012). 
The quality standards in Germany (DIN 51731, 
1996), Sweden (SS 187120, 1998) and Austria 
(M7135, 2000) require ash contents smaller than or 
equal to 0.5-1.5% for wood pellets. Therefore, the 
biomass of the species B. tuldoides, B. vulgaris var. 
vittata and D. asper, with ash contents above 2%, 
fall outside of the European quality standards for 
pellet production.  
The average values of the highest calorific 
value (Table 2) ranged from 4515.1 to 4662.9 
kcal.kg-1, with no significant difference among 
species. The values recorded in this study support 
findings of Scurlock et al., (2000) and Liu et al. 
(2014) for bamboo species and by Soares et al., 
(2015) for E. urograndis. The biomass of bamboo 
species pellets has satisfactory calorific values for 
production and marketing in Europe (DIN 51731, 
1996; SS 187120, 1998; M7135, 2000) and values 
similar to wood. 
 
Table 2. Calorific values, bulk density and energy of the biomass 
Species 
Calorific value  
Bulk density  
Energy density  
(kcal.kg-1) 
(g.cm-3) 
(Gcal.m-3) 
B. tuldoides 
4515.1 a  (38.1) 
0.35  a  (0.01)   
1.59  a  (0.02) 
B. vulgaris 
4662.9 a  (45.2)  
0.29  b  (0.02) 
1.35  b  (0.09) 
D. asper 
4526.2 a  (29.7) 
0.25  b  (0.02) 
1.13  b  (0.02) 
E. urograndis  
4657.6 a  (41.2) 
0.26  b  (0.02) 
1.23  b  (0.10) 
Means followed by the standard deviation. Means followed by the same letter in the column do not differ by the Tukey test at 5% 
significance. 
 
The bulk and energy density (Table 2) were 
directly related with each other. The species B. 
tuldoides, had the highest and significant bulk 
density value (0.35 g.cm-3) and the highest energy 
density (1.59 Gcal.m-3) (PINHEIRO et al. 2005). 
Energy density is an important parameter for solid 
fuels, because it measures the amount of energy 
stored in a given volume of material. Brand et al. 
(2005) and Pincelli (2011) evaluated the bulk 
density of forest harvesting and wood industry 
residues, and found values for eucalyptus ranging 
from 0.19 to 0.26 g.cm-3. 
The low energy density of the biomass with 
respect to oil and coal, implies a high cost of 
transportation and storage (COUTO et al. 2004). 
Accordingly, the research and development of 
techniques aiming at greater concentration of energy 
per unit volume, as in pelletizing, are key to 
increase the use of biomass as an energy source. 
Pellets add value to the final product with 
compression 
and 
increased 
energy 
density, 
promoting easy handling, low humidity, large 
storage capacity, in addition to the thermal 
regularity 
and 
efficiency 
during 
combustion 
(COUTO et al., 2004; PAULA et al., 2011). 
 
Characteristics of bamboo and eucalyptus pellets  
 
The results of the pellet characterization 
analyses are shown in Tables 3 and 4, and consist on 
the arithmetic mean of 30 pellet measurements for 
each variable. The biomass used for pellet 
production had its moisture content adjusted to 20% 
(humidity 
basis), 
as 
recommended 
by 
the 
equipment, once water in the material favors heat 
transfer, and, consequently the link among particles 
during compaction (QUIRINO et al., 2012). The 
reduction in the moisture content of the biomass of 
four species studied, during the pellet manufacturing 
process, was around 12%, reaching values from 7.5 
to 8.2% after compression. These values are within 
the optimum levels according to the required quality 
standards DIN 51731 (1996), SS 187120 (1998) and 
M7135 (2000). Moisture content influences biomass 
ignition, as well as the calorific value, once fuel 
energy is wasted in water evaporation during 
combustion, also interfering with the durability 
compressed materials (QUIRINO et al., 2012). 

926 
Production and characterization… 
 
SETTE JR. C. R. et al. 
Biosci. J., Uberlândia, v. 32, n. 4, p. 922-930, July/Aug. 2016 
 
The diameter and average length of the 
bamboo and eucalyptus pellets range from 6.0-6.2 
mm and 28.0-29.8 mm, without significant 
differences among species. The uniformity of pellet 
dimensions is an important factor in the combustion 
of the material (LIU et al., 2014). Truly, the 
combustion rate is more uniform in thinner pellets 
than in pellets with larger diameter, especially in 
small ovens (PÄIVI, 2001). The bamboo and 
eucalyptus pellets produced in this study are in 
accordance to the required in European quality 
standards (DIN 51731,1996; SS 187120, 998 and 
M7135, 2000) in regards to diameter and length. 
 
Table 3. Moisture content, diameter and length of the pellets 
Means followed by the standard deviation. Means followed by the same letter in the column do not differ by the Tukey test at 5% 
significance. 
 
The average bulk density values of the 
pellets was 0.65 g.cm-3 for B. tuldoides, 0.61 g.cm-3 
for B. vulgaris, 0.60 g.cm-3 for D. asper and 0.67 
g.cm-3 for E. urograndis and the apparent density of 
each pellet ranged from 1.15 to 1.38 g.cm-3, with no 
significant differences (Table 4). Liu et al. (2012) 
reported a bulk density variation of bamboo pellets 
of 0.52 to 0.65 g.cm-3 and the apparent density of the 
pellets ranged from 1.05 to 1.20 g.cm-3, supporting 
the data obtained in this study. The normative 
standards of pellets quality, regarding the variables 
apparent and bulk density, provide values between 
1.0 and 1.40 g.cm-3 and above 0.6 g.cm-3, 
respectively (DIN 51731, 1996 and M7135, 2000). 
Therefore, the bamboo and eucalyptus pellets are 
consistent with the recommended by European 
standards. 
 
Table 4. Bulk, apparent and energy density of the pellets. 
Species 
Bulk density 
Apparent density  
Energy density 
(g/cm³) 
(g/cm³) 
(Gcal.m-3) 
B. tuldoides 
0.65   a   (0.03) 
1.15  a  (0.17) 
5.20 a  (1.21) 
B. vulgaris 
0.61   a    (0.05) 
1.38  a  (0.24) 
6.46 a  (1.52) 
D. asper 
0.60   a   (0.01) 
1.36  a  (0.28) 
6.17 a (1.49) 
E. urograndis 
0.67    a   (0.05) 
1.36  a  (0.24) 
6.36 a (1.74) 
Means followed by the standard deviation. Means followed by the same letter in the column do not differ by the Tukey test at 5% 
significance. 
 
An increase in the magnitude of 327, 478, 
546 and 517% in the energy density of B. tuldoides, 
B. vulgaris, D. asper and E. urograndis biomass, 
respectively, 
is 
observed 
after 
the 
biomass 
compaction process (production of pellets) (Table 4; 
Table 2). This increase is due to the increase in 
biomass density after compression, highlighting the 
importance of pelletization in using lignocellulosic 
materials to produce bioenergy, due to the highest 
concentration of energy per unit volume. 
The average durability values were 91% for 
B. tuldoides, 98% for B. vulgaris, 93% for D. asper 
and 96% for E. urograndis (Figure 1), with no 
statistical difference between the means. Liu et al. 
(2014) recorded durability levels of bamboo pellets 
ranging from 95 to 98%, showing the importance of 
pellet resistance, especially in the handling and 
transport.  
The “in natura” biomass usually has 
drawbacks regarding energy use, especially due to 
its high moisture content, low density and calorific 
level, causing high transportation and handling 
costs. However, these problems can be reduced if 
this biomass is densified, as found in the results 
obtained for the bamboo and eucalyptus pellets, 
providing more energy per unit volume, in addition 
to improving handling and transport (FELFLI et al., 
2011; LIU et al., 2014). 
 
Species 
Moisture content 
Diameter 
Length 
(%) 
(mm) 
(mm) 
B. tuldoides 
7.7  a  (0.5) 
6.1  a   (0.1) 
28.4  a  (1.3) 
B. vulgaris 
7.5  a  (0.4) 
6.1  a   (0.1) 
29.8  a  (1.3) 
D. asper 
8.2  a  (0.6) 
6.0  a  (0.1) 
28.9  a  (1.7) 
E. urograndis 
7.9  a  (0.5) 
6.2  a  (0.1) 
28.0  a  (1.4) 

927 
Production and characterization… 
 
SETTE JR. C. R. et al. 
Biosci. J., Uberlândia, v. 32, n. 4, p. 922-930, July/Aug. 2016 
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
E. urograndis
B. tuldoides
B. vulgaris
D. asper
Durabilty (%)
 
Figure 1. Durability of the bamboo and eucalyptus pellets. The bars indicate the standard deviation from the 
mean. 
 
Additional research associated with bamboo 
species are recommended, especially regarding 
productivity, availability and access to biomass, in 
order to endorse its use as an alternative energy 
source. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
All the characteristics of the bamboo and 
eucalyptus pellets meet quality specifications 
required in international marketing standards, except 
for the ash levels.    
The species Bambusa vulgaris var. vitatta, 
Dendrocalamus asper and Bambusa tuldoides 
showed energy characteristics that indicate its 
potential to be used as an energy source in the form 
of pellets. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The authors thank CNPq for funding this 
research – notice number 66/2013 - MCTI/AÇÃO 
TRANSVERSAL, process number 458300/2013-6. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
ABIPEL – Associação Brasileira das Indústrias de Pellets. Mapa de Pellets no Brasil. Itapeva. 2013. 4p. 
 
ANEEL. Biomassa. In: Atlas de Energia Elétrica do Brasil. Brasília: Agência Nacional de Energia Elétrica, 
Brasília. 2013. 74p.  
 
ARRANZ, J. I.; MIRANDA, M. T.; MONTERO, I.; SEPÚLVEDA, F. J.; ROJAS, C. V. Characterization and 
combustion behaviour of comercial and experimental wood pellets in South West Europe. Fuel. Londres, v. 
142, p. 199–207, 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.10.059 
 
ASSOCIAÇÃO BRASILEIRA DE NORMAS TÉCNICAS - ABNT. NBR 14929.  Madeira - Determinação do 
teor de umidade de cavacos - Método por secagem em estufa. Rio de Janeiro, 2003.  
 
ASSOCIAÇÃO BRASILEIRA DE NORMAS TÉCNICAS - ABNT. NBR 6922. Carvão vegetal - Ensaios 
físicos - Determinação da massa específica – Densidade a granel. Rio de Janeiro, 1981.  
 
ASSOCIAÇÃO BRASILEIRA DE NORMAS TÉCNICAS - ABNT. NBR 8112. Carvão vegetal - Análise 
Imediata. Rio de Janeiro, 1986. 
 
ASSOCIAÇÃO BRASILEIRA DE NORMAS TÉCNICAS - ABNT. NBR 8633. Carvão vegetal - 
Determinação do poder calorífico. Rio de Janeiro, 1984. 
 

928 
Production and characterization… 
 
SETTE JR. C. R. et al. 
Biosci. J., Uberlândia, v. 32, n. 4, p. 922-930, July/Aug. 2016 
BRAND, M. A.; COSTA, V. J.; DURIGON, A.; AMORIN, M. Determinação das propriedades energéticas de 
resíduos de madeira em diferentes períodos de armazenamento. In: CONGRESSO DE INOVAÇÃO 
TECNOLÓGICA EM ENERGIA ELÉTRICA. Anais do III Citenel, Florianópolis: Agência Nacional de 
Energia Elétrica, 2005. 
 
BRITO, J. O.; BARRICHELO, L. E. G. Carvão vegetal de madeira de desbaste de Pinus. IPEF, Piracicaba, 
1982. 
 
CARASCHI, J. C.; PINHEIRO, D. G.; VENTORIM, G. Caracterização física e química dos pellets de madeira 
produzidos no Brasil. In: XIII ENCONTRO BRASILEIRO EM MADEIRAS E EM ESTRUTURAS DE 
MADEIRA. Anais... Vitória: Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo, jul. 2012. 
 
CARONE, M. T.; PANTALEO, A.; PELLERANO, A. Influence of process parameters and biomass 
characteristics on the durability of pellets from the pruning residues of Olea europaea L. Biomass and 
Bioenergy, Oxford, Inglaterra, v. 35, n. 1, p. 402–410, 2011. 
 
COSTA, T. M. S. Estudo da viabilidade técnica do emprego do bambu da espécie Bambusa vulgaris 
Shard. como carvão vegetal. 2004. 74 p. Dissertação (Mestrado em Ciências de Tecnologia Nuclear-
Materiais) – Autarquia associada à Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo. 2004.  
 
COUTO, L.; MÜLLER, M. D.; SILVA JÚNIOR, A. G.; CONDE, L. J. N. Produção de pellets de madeira - o 
caso da Bio-energy no Espírito Santo. Biomassa & Energia, Viçosa, v. 1, n. 1, p. 45-52, 2004. 
 
DEUTSCHES INSTITUT FÜR NORMUNG - DIN 51731: Testing of solid fuels – Compressed untreated 
wood, Requirements and testing. Berlin, 1996. 
 
DUCA, D.; RIVA, G.; PEDRETTI, E. F.; TOSCANO, G. Wood pellet quality with respect to EN 14961-2 
standard and certifications. Fuel, Londres, v. 135, p. 9-14, 2014. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2014.06.042 
 
ESCOBAR, J. F.; COELHO, S. T. O Potencial dos pellets de madeira como energia no Brasil. Jornal 
Biomassa, Cruzeiro do Iguaçu, v. 3, n. 12, p. 9-14, 2014. 
 
FAO – Forest Products Statistics. Global Forest Products Facts and Figures. 2012. 
 
FELFLI, F. F.; MESA, J. M.; ROCHA, J. D.; FILIPPETTO, D.; LUENGO, C. A.; PIPPO, W. A. Biomass 
briquetting and its perspectives in Brazil. Biomass and Bioenergy, Oxford, Inglaterra, v. 35, n. 1, p. 236 – 242, 
2011.  
 
GARCIA, D. P.; CARASCHI, J. C.; VENTORIM, G. Caracterização energética de pellets de madeira. Revista 
da Madeira, Curitiba, v. 135, p. 14-18, 2013.  
 
JMP Development Group. JMP Statistics and Graphics Guide, Version 3.1. SAS Institute, Cary, NC. 1997. 
 
LIU, Z. J.; JIANG, Z. H.; CAI, Z. Y.; FEI, B. H.; YU, Y.; LIU, X. E. Effects of carbonization conditions on 
properties of bamboo pellets. Renewable Energy, Oxford, Inglaterra, v. 51, p. 1–6, 2013.  
 
LIU, Z. J.; JIANG, Z. H.; CAI, Z. Y.; FEI, B. H.; YU, Y.; LIU, X. E. Moisture of bamboo for pellets. 
BioResources, Raleigh, Carolina do Norte, v. 7, p. 1548–1557, 2012.  
 
LIU, Z. J.; FEI, B. H.; JIANG, Z. H.; CAI, Z. Y. LIU, X. E. Important properties of bamboo pellets to be used 
as commercial solid fuel in China. Wood Sci Technol, Nova Iorque, v. 48, p. 903–917, 2014.  
 
LOBOVIKOV, M.; PAUDEL, S.; PIAZZA, M.; REN, H.; WU, J. World bamboo resources. Rome: FAO, 
2007. 73 p. 
 

929 
Production and characterization… 
 
SETTE JR. C. R. et al. 
Biosci. J., Uberlândia, v. 32, n. 4, p. 922-930, July/Aug. 2016 
LYBEER, B. Age-related anatomical aspects of some temperate and tropical bamboo culms (Poaceae: 
Bambusoideae) Tese (Doutorado em Ciência: Biologia) -  Universidade de Gent – Faculdade Wetenschappen. 
Gent, Holanda, 2006. 
 
O STERREICHISCHES NORMUNGSINSTITUT - O¨ NORM M 7135. Compressed wood or compressed 
bark in natural state - pellets and briquettes, requirements and test specifications. Vienna, Austria, 2000. 
 
MAEDA, S.; SILVA, H. D.; CARDOSO, C. Resposta de Pinus taeda à aplicação de cinza de biomassa vegetal 
em Cambissolo Húmico, em vaso. Pesquisa Florestal Brasileira, Colombo, n. 56, p. 43-52, 2008. 
 
MOGNON, F.; RODRIGUES, A. L.; SANQUETTA, C. R.; CORTE, A. P. D.; DE NOVAES, A. B; BLUM, C. 
T.  Alocação e modelagem da biomassa em Dendrocalamus asper. Revista Floresta, Curitiba, PR, v. 45, n. 1, 
p. 1 - 10, jan./mar. 2015.  
 
OLIVEIRA, A. C.; CANEIRO, A. C. O.; VITAL, B. R.; ALMEIDA, W.; PEREIRA, B. L. C.; CARDOSO, M. 
T. Parâmetros de qualidade da madeira e do carvão vegetal de Eucalyptus pellita F. Muell. Scientia Forestalis, 
Piracicaba, v. 38, n. 87, p. 431-439, 2010. 
 
PAULA, L. E. R.; TRUGILHO, P. F.; REZENDE, R. N.; ASSIS, C. O.; BALIZA, A. E. R. Produção e 
avaliação de briquetes de resíduos lignocelulósicos Pesquisa Florestal Brasileira, Colombo, v. 31, n. 66, p. 
103-112, 2011. 
 
PINCELLI, A. L. P. S. M. Características dos resíduos da colheita de madeira de eucalipto e pinus, 
submetidos ao tratamento térmico, com foco na aplicação energética. 2011. 127 p. Tese (Doutorado em 
Recursos Florestais). Escola Superior de Agricultura “Luiz de Queiroz” – ESALQ/USP, Piracicaba, 2011. 
 
PINHEIRO, G. F.; RENDEIRO, G.; PINHO, J. T. Densidade energética de resíduos vegetais. Biomassa e 
Bioenergia, Viçosa, v. 2 n. 2, p. 113-123. 2005. 
 
QUIRINO, W. F.; PINHA, I. V. O.; MOREIRA, A. C. O.; SOUZA, F.; TOMAZELLO FILHO, M. 
Densitometria de raios x na análise da qualidade de briquetes de resíduos de madeira.  Scientia Forestalis, 
Piracicaba, v. 40, n. 96, p. 525-536, 2012. 
 
RODRIGUES, M. S.; BERALDO, A. L.; SAVASTANO JÚNIOR, H.; SANTO, S. F. Cinza de palha de cana-
de-açúcar como adição mineral em fibrocimento. Revista Brasileira de Engenharia Agrícola e Ambiental, v. 
17, n. 12, p. 1347- 1354, 2013. http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S1415-43662013001200014 
 
SANTANA, G. M. Resíduos de bambu para a produção de carvao ativado. 2014. 112p. Dissertação 
(Mestrado em Ciência e Tecnologia da Madeira). Universidade Federal de Lavras, Lavras/MG, 2014.  
 
SCURLOCK, J. M. O.; DAYTON, D. C.; HAMES, B. Bamboo: An Overlooked Biomass Resource? 
Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge – Tennessee, v. 19, n. 4, p. 229–244 2000. 
 
SANTI, T. O potencial do bambu: desafios e oportunidades da fibra na produção de celulose e papel e as novas 
pesquisas sobre seu uso para fins energéticos e geração de biomateriais. Revista de tecnologia em celulose e 
papel. Ano lxxvi nº 4, abril 2015. 
 
SOARES, V. C.; BIANCHI, M. L.; TRUGILHO, P. F.; HÖFLER, J. PEREIRA, A. J. Análise das propriedades 
da madeira e do carvão vegetal de híbridos de eucalipto em três idades. Cerne, Lavras, v. 21, n. 2, p. 191-197, 
2015. 
 
SWEDISH STANDARDS INSTITUTION - SS 187120. Biofuels and peat fuel pellets classification. 
Stockholm, Sweden 1998. 
 

930 
Production and characterization… 
 
SETTE JR. C. R. et al. 
Biosci. J., Uberlândia, v. 32, n. 4, p. 922-930, July/Aug. 2016 
TOSCANO, G.; RIVA, G.; PEDRETTI, E. F.; CORINALDESI, F.; MENGARELLI, C.; DUCA, D. 
Investigation on wood pellet quality and relationship between ash content and the most important chemical 
elements. Journal Biomass and Bioenergy, Barking, Inglaterra, v. 56, p. 317-322, 2013. 
 
TAMOLANG, F. N; LOPEZ, F. R.; SEMANA, J. A.; CASIN, R. F.; ESPILOY, Z. B. Properties and utilization 
of Philippine erect bamboos. Forpride digest, Laguna, v. 99, n. 34, p. 31-41, 1980.  
 
WERTHER, J.; SAENGER, M.; HARTGE, E.U.; OGADA, T.; SIAGI, Z. Combustion of agricultural residues. 
Progress in Energy and Combustion Science. Hamburg, Germany, v. 26, n. 1, p. 1-27, 2000. 
 
ZHANG, F. S.; YAMASAKI, S.; NANZYO, M. Waste ashes for use in agricultural production: I. Liming 
effect, contents of plants nutrients and chemical characteristics of some metals. Science Total Environment, v. 
284, p. 215-225, 2002. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0048-9697(01)00887-7 
 
 
 
